["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" playing]
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
[water trickling]
What's to be done about the emperor? He
still doesn't give a wit about the senate.
We've been reduced
to making tepid amendments
to rulings he enacts without our consent.
[man 1] It's madness it's what it is.
That imbecile Aelius Caesar.
With someone like him on the throne,
Rome will fall faster
than Achilles without sandals.
Perhaps, but we can't ignore how
infatuated the common people are with him.
[scoffs] Hadrian has certainly
found himself a charismatic puppet.
Come now, Sir Atilius.
This is no laughing matter.
Rome is in a state of peril.
We must find a way to convince Hadrian
to expand our borders
instead of merely maintaining them.
And when do you propose we do that
when the emperor is always out
touring the provinces?
He's hardly ever in Rome.
One way or another, it is our duty
to force him to heed our demands.
If we leave Rome's future to a man
who holes up in his villa
instead of engaging with our enemies,
it will be the death of the empire.
Yes, war is necessary
to preserve our borders and our dignity.
That’s exactly right.
-[ominous music]
-But in order to gain power over Hadrian,
we must first rally all of Rome
against his puppet Aelius.
[man 2] But turning the people
against the emperor
and his son would be considered
an act of treason.
If we're found out, we'll be imprisoned.
Perhaps even executed.
Unless the people turn against the emperor
on their own.
You sound like you have a plan.
Care to share it with us?
First, we must do something
about those thermae.
Thermae?
Recently,
all sorts of luxurious bathhouses
have been built across Rome
in Aelius's name.
Yes, I heard a leisure oriented bathhouse
was built recently.
Quite the innovation.
Aelius is so popular
because our citizens love thermae,
so there is only one course of action
for us now.
We must destroy
the one building the thermae
in Aelius's name.
Oh? And just who is this bath builder?
His name is Lucius Modestus,
the emperor’s own bathhouse architect.
As long as he lives and works
with the emperor and Aelius…
Rome will continue to rot, yes, I see.
We must eliminate him
and bring the people of this empire
back to their senses.
How so?
You can just leave the details to me.
Let us destroy Lucius Modestus
and take back Rome.
[dramatic music ends]
[indistinct chatter]
[Marcus] Come on, Lucius,
don't look so depressed.
It’s not your fault
the old battle axe left.
I mean,
you were just working too hard, right?
Marcus, do not try to console me.
I neglected my wife and as a result,
my marriage has fallen apart.
If that's how you feel,
then just take some time off.
I cannot take time off!
My duty is to Rome herself.
Do you think Romulus and Remus
took time off?
It's hopeless.
[gentle harp music]
I must persevere no matter what the cost.
[man] Is Lucius Modestus here?
Hey, Lucius.
An urgent message from the senate
for you, sir.
Another order for a wacky bathhouse, huh?
Apparently I am to go to the area
behind Mount Vesuvius
and survey a potential hot spring site.
Wait, but that place is bad news.
His majesty is in poor health
and it seems that he wants me
to build him a wellness retreat
using the hot water
at the base of the mountain.
Then I shall away.
But wait!
Are you crazy?
That place is crawling with bandits.
You're gonna get yourself killed
going there alone, Lucius.
It's an order from his majesty.
I have to go.
Well, you gotta do what you gotta do,
I guess.
Just be careful, okay?
I will.
[crows cawing]
[Lucius] What a strange and desolate
landscape this is, and so close to Rome.
There appears to be steam
billowing from the ground in some areas.
It seems getting anything done here
by myself will be quite difficult.
I suppose I'll return to town for now.
[whinnies]
[tense ominous music]
[groans]
[snickering]
-[horse brays]
-It seems I have company.
[man snickers]
You're the first traveler
we've seen in a while.
We're all here
to make you feel nice and welcome.
I've no time to trifle with you.
I've come on official business
from the emperor.
[scoffs] Official business? [laughing]
You’re joking, aren't you?
There's no official business
in a place like this.
I have come here to build a bathhouse.
He says he came here to build a bathhouse.
Oh man!
How can you stand there and mock thermae
when you smell
as if you've been rolling in feces?
Just how long have you louts gone
without a bath?
Who cares. Us bandits have better things
to do with our time than take baths.
But your stench is unimaginably powerful.
Isn't it difficult to sneak up on people?
[bandit 1] He's got a point, I guess.
[bandit 2] Oh, I've smelled worse.
[grunts]
So what if we stink a little?
We don't need sneak attacks!
Hand over your horse
and any treasure you've got on you!
You men are as ignorant as you are filthy.
There's treasure all around us
as we speak.
What… what did you just say?
I think he said there's treasure here?
Don't you bullshit us, bath boy,
we'll carve you up!
Fine. If you want to see the treasure,
then I'll take you to it.
[tense percussive music]
Behold, nature's copious bounty.
There’s so much water here
and it's the perfect bathing temperature.
The potential of this place is massive.
This water is worth its weight in gold.
Hey. Quit your splashing around down there
and tell us where the treasure is.
The treasure? [chuckles]
Why, it's right in front of you,
my friend.
Where? The water?
Are you out of your mind?
-This water ain't worth two--
-Help me with this.
Oh, I'll help you, alright. Help you die.
I need your help finding out
how rich this water will make us.
Rich, huh?
-Hmm.
-Huh?
Wait, do we have to help him?
You'll help him if I say so.
Now get to work!
Good,
now bring that boulder over there closer.
Yes, that one.
And move that one to the right.
I said move, not nudge!
Who does this bath bastard think he is?
Just bear with it,
the boss told us to listen to him.
Fine. But as soon as we find the treasure,
I'm gonna suffocate him in my armpit.
That's damn right.
-Huh?
-[water splashes]
Hey, what are you doing?
We're working ourselves to the bone
and you're relaxing?
You! Just what is this?
We ain't your servants here.
The water is excellent, just as I thought.
[flies buzzing]
-[gentle percussive music]
-[sighing]
[man] It's like years of anger
just melting away.
I feel like I'm being reborn.
[sighs]
I feel so at peace in this bath.
If a rich man showed up
blindfolded right now,
I don't think I'd even
want to rob and kill him.
You know?
[sighs] You could say that again.
But still, how are we supposed
to make a living in a place like this
without robbing people?
Yeah, I guess you're right.
It's a real shame
but it has to be this way.
We can't wash our sins away
along with all this gunk.
[screeching]
[Lucius] It's far too early for pessimism,
my bathing brethren.
Hey you, you think you're pretty funny,
do you?
This wet pile of rocks
isn't treasure at all.
You've been spinning us some horse
about how this place is
what really matters and we're tired of it.
I mean, I guess you're right
that the bath is a place
of healing for our bodies and souls
but it ain't gonna fill our stomachs,
you ass!
So how are you gonna make it
worth our while, huh? [chuckles]
Friend, this place contains more value
than any treasure on earth.
Be patient, I promise,
it shall bring you peace
for the rest of your days.
Yeah, well, I ain't a patient man,
bath boy.
Just allow me to explain
what I have in mind.
[groans]
-[bandits laughing]
-What an idiot!
Big fall for a little man!
You okay there, guy?
Oh, don't worry, that bastard's fine.
He's not down there!
[Lucius]
Is this some sort of flat faced city?
These mountains surrounding the area
look like large volcanoes.
And this appears to be yet another
gorgeous flat face garb.
There's no one here.
Did someone forget their clothing?
I suppose I'll borrow it
just for a moment.
[upbeat music]
[sighs] Man, what a great bath.
This cityscape is astounding.
I feel totally and completely at ease
in this place.
A wonderfully relaxing vista
enveloped in hot spring steam.
To think one could find such peace
at the base of so many enormous volcanoes.
I recall that I once developed
a very similar revival plan.
Who am I fooling?
This is far more spectacular than anything
I could've ever envisioned.
[sniffs]
Hey, you look like a manju man.
My buns are hot and steamy!
They're delightful!
Why don't you give them a taste?
Sweet Bacchus!
What is this delightful confection?
Is this some sort of bread?
If you like what we got up front,
then you'll love what we got in the back.
Who wants to eat my wife's buns?
OKUMURA HOT SPRING
What is this strange writing?
Oh, that there says "flowers of sulfur."
Oh, you don't know Japanese.
Oh, geez. Just wait here a sec, okay?
It turned white. And this scent!
I understand now.
So this powder is from the hot spring.
With this, one can enjoy
the soothing atmosphere
of a hot spring in their own home bath.
One cannot help but respect
the flat faces' impeccable taste
for bathing.
SOUVENIR SHOP
SHELL CRAFT
-[gasps]
-[kids laughing]
-[rhythmic percussive music]
-[cawing]
[Lucius] I understand now.
This town prospers so because they sell
such fascinating goods here.
I wish there were a way for me
to take them back to Rome with me
but tragically, I cannot.
I do have Roman currency with me
but I doubt they'd accept such a thing
in this place.
What a lively stall.
What do they sell here?
[boy] Daddy, I want Hikachu, Hikachu!
Aw, you missed him again!
Looks like I couldn't catch him.
[woman groans]
This is super hard!
You got this, girl.
See? I suck so hard at this.
Let's just stop.
Hey, come on. You were super close
that time. Just give it another… shot.
-Hmm.
-Huh?
That foreign guy's a straight hottie.
He's been looking at us for a while. Maybe
you should let him take a shot at it.
Yeah, I think the wall's taken enough
of a beating from me.
Hiya! Did you want to try and shoot?
Do they want me
to demonstrate my archery skills?
Though this bow
is quite flimsily constructed.
So this device
placed at the end of the shaft
serves to prevent injury.
Interesting.
GRAND PRIZE!
So cool!
[bell ringing]
[Lucius]
What is this fascinating creature?
I can never accept
such an extravagant reward
for striking such an easy target.
And yet…
Wow!
Looks like the hot foreign guy
got the grand prize!
Are you like an archer?
[Lucius] Well, I earned this prize
with these women's weapon of choice.
Perhaps I'm obligated to give it to them.
-[in Roman] This belongs to you.
-A what?
Are you trying to hawk this to me?
I think he's trying to give it to us.
-No thanks. That thing's gross.
-See ya!
[indistinct chatter]
This peculiar doll is precious proof
that I have finally surpassed the flat
faces in at least one area of expertise.
I wish to take it back to Rome with me
but…
-[grunts]
-I'm sorry about that.
[in Roman] Pardon.
A wallet?
Excuse me, sir. You dropped this.
Here, I'd just hate for it to get lost.
What's this?
A coin satchel?
This doesn't belong to me but…
Could it belong
to the owner of these clothes?
I must return it at once!
[soft quirky music]
[man groans softly] That's weird.
Not great.
Oh well, looks like it really isn't here.
Damn it! Someone stole it.
At least I wasn't carrying a lot of cash
in my wallet today, but still.
[in Roman] Is this your wallet?
Oh, he has my wallet!
Seems like this guy
must have put on your kimono by accident.
You came all the way back
just to return it?
[in Roman] I apologize.
That's right!
What's all this?
[in Roman]
Can I buy your currency with this?
What did he say? I'm totally lost.
Oh, wait. This is real silver.
Silver?
You're out of your mind, no it's not.
I work at a pawn shop.
There's no doubt about it.
I want to exchange this with that.
I've got it!
Maybe he's saying he wants to trade this
for what you've got in your wallet!
[Lucius] I am baffled
as to how much all of this is worth.
But surely it must be enough
to eat something.
But more importantly…
what a beautiful
intricate currency this is.
[man] Come again!
RAMEN
[Lucius] What is this?
I smell something incredible.
Could it be a restaurant?
It calls out to my stomach.
So, what'll it be, sir?
[in Roman] I'll have what he got.
Huh?
[in Roman] The same thing as him.
Yeah, you lost me, pal.
I think he wants the same thing
I'm having, shoyu ramen.
Oh, is that so?
One shoyu ramen coming right up.
[in Roman] Thank you!
Uh, yeah, it's de nada.
Hmm. It seems they understand
so long as I speak with feeling. [sniffs]
[Lucius] But now…
there is a smell so delicious,
it sends my senses into a stupor.
[man] Alright, here you go.
How did he manage to make it so quickly?
And what exactly is this bizarre
yet entrancing soup?
Thinly sliced meat and boiled eggs,
that's about all I can recognize.
And what are these long yellow vines?
And to eat this beautiful whirlpool object
would be an insult
to the artist who designed it.
What could it be?
My gods! This pattern on the bowl!
It's clearly a Greek meander!
At appears that the flat faces
have been influenced
by the Greeks just as we Romans have.
But cuisine such as this
can't be found anywhere in the empire.
[man] Uh, sir… Sir?
If you don't eat quick,
your noodles will stretch out.
Huh?
I said if you don't eat quick,
your noodles will get all stretched out…
like, you know what? Never mind.
Is he telling me to eat it
before it cools?
Well, well, well.
Looks like you finally figured it out.
[lighthearted music]
[slurping]
What is the meaning of this?
These people have supposedly
been influenced by Greek cuisine
just as we have and yet their food is so…
[whimpers softly]
How is it that only the flat faces
have managed to create
something so decadent?
What's wrong, sir? Did you burn your mouth
on the noodles or something?
[in Roman] It's really delicious.
-[chuckles]
-[slurping]
Probably giving his compliments
to the chef.
Judging by the way he's gobbling it up,
I think he must like it.
You mean to tell me my ramen is so good,
it moved this foreign man to tears?
Excuse me.
[Lucius] If these flat faces tasted even
the most exulted of delicacies in Rome,
they would turn up their noses in disgust!
This is for you
since you liked the ramen so much.
Go ahead and eat them all up.
They're on me tonight.
[Lucius] He's telling me to eat these?
I see. This must be some sort
of side dish that accompanies the soup.
Whoa! Looks like my very own ramen
and gyoza are international hits!
I must bring this back to Rome with me.
Oh, are you ready to pay the bill?
How did they manage to create currency
with such brilliant gold
and a perfectly round hole in the center?
It must be worth a fortune.
[in Roman] Please accept this.
-Huh?
-Take it as my token of gratitude.
[chuckles] Is this how foreigners joke or?
It seems he's not satisfied.
But if this isn't enough,
then exactly how much will suffice?
Use this one.
That'll cover the whole cost of your meal.
No, it can't be!
This piece of papyrus is also currency.
But if so, then that means
the person etched here
must be the flat faces' emperor!
[man] Oh, great. This is perfect.
Thanks, mister.
Give me a second
to grab you your change, okay?
[gentle music]
That papyrus currency
was truly something to behold.
I have seen and eaten
so many splendid things.
But my mind is still restless.
[man] Oh, hey, you're the guy from before.
Thanks, have a good one.
I must ensure these invaluable treasures
are not lost on my journey back to Rome.
-Look over there.
-[chuckling]
[gasps]
[groaning]
[Lucius] My precious spoils of war!
-[grunts]
-[gasping] Oh my God!
Oh my God!
Was that the sexy archer weirdo?
Yeah, do you think he's okay?
-[water trickling]
-[groaning softly]
Oh, hey. Look who's alive.
Look, I don't know when you found
the time to put some clothes on
but you and those ugly things
washed up here together.
What?
They've come! My spoils are here!
Your what are here?
You're gonna tell us what you found?
These are… [gasps]
Could you hold them for a moment?
[chuckles]
Thank the gods.
Now, we have all the ingredients.
There's no time to waste, friends!
Huh?
[grandiose uplifting music]
It certainly has gotten lively
around here.
Of course it has. After all,
this place is the talk of all of Rome.
Wow! Mama, can I have one of these?
Welcome to our store.
How much for one of these
adorable shell figurines?
Uh… Those are… how much are they?
Well, don't look at me.
You don't remember either?
Just make something up.
What's a regular price?
I don't know
if I've ever bought anything before…
Yeah, it's true.
We've been stealing stuff for a long time.
[chuckling]
Just kidding, one as please.
My, how cheap!
I'll take three of them, please.
[both] Thank you for your business!
[man] Alright, one deluxe soup for you.
Wow, it smells fantastic!
Help yourself to a side dish as well.
[customer] What are these things?
It's amazing!
Hey!
Hey, boss!
I told you not to call me that.
I'm this shop's owner now.
[all] Yes, sir, Mr. Owner!
[man] Looks like everyone's
on the straight and narrow now.
I'm grateful to you, Lucius.
You weren't kidding when you said
that spring was the real treasure.
[sighs]
[man] To think Lucius
would build a bathhouse here.
He bested us.
-[Sergius chuckles]
-Our plan was an abject failure.
But I suppose in a way
all that plotting against Hadrian
really did end up resulting in something
that was good for Rome.
[sighs] It truly did, yes.
I'm forgetting wanting
to overthrow Hadrian in the first place.
[sighs]
Hmm.
Your majesty.
No need for that, Lucius Modestus.
Raise up your head.
Sire.
It seems you have stirred up
the whole city again, Lucius.
I am in awe, truly I am.
Thank you for your kind words.
But I truly did nothing more than that
which was asked of me, your highness.
Oh? But I do not recall
asking anything of you.
I simply went along with your idea, yes?
[Lucius] Uh,
then who in the world sent that letter?
[Hadrian] More importantly…
I've prepared a special reward for you
on this day, Lucius.
[grunts]
[gasps]
-My Livia!
-[grandiose opera music]
Because of my various requests, your
marriage was very nearly torn asunder.
I have done you and your wife
a great disservice, Lucius.
I apologize.
No, please don't apologize, your majesty.
My dear, Lucius.
Your humility will never cease
to impress me.
Go on!
Livia!
[sobbing]
I'm so sorry, Livia.
I focus too much on my work
and not enough on you.
No, please.
The empire has always needed you, Lucius.
I was always too hard on you,
I should've known.
I should've known what wonderful work
you are doing for everyone.
Livia…
Thank you, my love.
[gentle uplifting music]
[whooping, laughing]
[lively opera music]
ALL BATHS LEAD TO ROME
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey to rediscover
Japan's bathing culture.
Today's theme is "Yu no Hana."
Yu no Hana appeared in the anime,
but what does
the actual product look like?
We went to investigate.
It's called Yu no Hana,
but what does the "hana" stand for?
What exactly is Yu no Hana?
Simply put,
Yu no Hana is a bath additive.
It's a by-product yielded
by cooling the water.
Deposits are formed by a chemical reaction
when the water is exposed to air.
-I see.
-That's the Yu no Hana.
The deposit is dried
and packaged as a bath additive.
-That's wonderful.
-So it's 100% sourced at Yubatake.
-It's from Yubatake.
-Yes.
-It's packed in here.
Is this the natural color
of the Yu no Hana?
-It's sulfur.
-Sulfur?
It's a component from the volcano.
To use this at home, please add
a teaspoon of it into the bath water.
That will be enough.
Then it becomes this hot spring?
-There are lots of hot spring products.
-Yes.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
[Mari] I'm sure many people in the past
wished they could take home
the hot spring water at Kusatsu.
I think it's wonderful
that the Kusatsu hot spring can be
recreated with Yu no Hana.
And the water at Kusatsu is beneficial
for wounds and cuts.
So if Lucius came here,
he would want to take this back to Rome.
Since Rome had many wounded people
due to all the wars and such,
I believe he would
happily take it back to Rome.
That's my idea.
[Mari] There were many memorable moments.
Japan is a country of hot springs.
I only traveled around
Gunma prefecture this time,
but there's a method of facing
and dealing with the hot spring.
I think a certain part
of Japan's civilization
was built together with the hot springs.
I really felt that during this trip.
When you visit the hot springs
located nationwide,
their local territory, climate,
national character, and history
are all reflected in each
of their hot springs.
So to sum it up, the hot spring
is a vital element of the earth
that provides humans
with the affirmation that we are alive.
This trip helped me to realize that.
If we are to create another series of
Thermae Romae,
I think that might become
the principal theme.
[Kenjiro Tsuda] Ms. Yamazaki's passion
that bubbles forth like the hot spring,
was inscribed onto the new page
of Thermae Romae.
[gentle pensive music]